So this building has from its beginning been
intended to be and has been a student funded
facility. A user funded in theory.
We had to go to the Texas legislature to get their
okay to charge a mandatory fee.
Any problems there? Yeah, a lot of them. Really?
What were they?
Well, initially, Texas had done this two years
before for their recreation center, and their fee
was $35.
And I'm not sure this ought to be, we had an
administrator, I can tell you later who it was, who
I think helped write the legislation, sent it
forward, didn't ask me, didn't ask anybody else.
Well, this legislation ended up being exactly
what Texas had. And our students had voted for 50,
not 35. So I spent the next two years or year and a
half saying, we're not gonna build this building
for 35 because we're gonna end up having a lot less
than what we need. Same thing happened in Texas.
They didn't get what they wanted for their 35. So we
ended up compromising, so to speak, He would go, we
would amend the bill two years later at 50 if we
would build, if we would put an auditorium on the
building. At that time we were looking at a leisure
pool. And so we, plus they also funded some money
for us too, three and a half million dollars. So.
All right, then who were the key planners of what
would go into the building? We did, I personally
visited 21 institutions. Moffett Adams was the
chief architect of the system. He went with me on
about 15 of those trips. So we got a pretty good
picture of what was out there. We selected an
architecture firm, Armand Mach out of San
Antonio. I just spelled the last name. Marmon,
M-A-R-M-O-N, and Mock is M-O-K. M-O-K, okay.
Marmon, Mock, two names. Oh, so it's hyphenated
names. It's not hyphenated. Not hyphenated, but
it's two different people. Two different names.
They were the architects, but before they were
brought on, our staff took the information we got
from the surveys. By that time, we'd done two
surveys of needs. So the students told us what they
thought they needed. We did an analysis of the
spaces that we had and what our staff thought we
needed. And then we sat down and wrote out what's
called a program that tells the architects what it
is that we want in each different space. all the
different kinds of spaces that we need and then
what we want to be in space. And actually, I think we
had 11 or 12 authors of that, people that were on
staff at that time, the majority of them. That was
Tom Reber,
James Walpert, Paula Opal, Mike Waldron, James
Nash, I think was on staff then, Rick Hall,
down the list
here um
there's about 11 different people i know i haven't
done it long yet
I guess
that's about it.
And the way we did it, and the reason I think it was so
successful, is Everybody who was on staff at that
time was assigned space or spaces. Many of them had
more than one space. And that was theirs from start
to finish. They wrote the program statement. In
that program statement, there's a list of
equipment. They end up speccing out all that
equipment for that particular space and going
through the purchasing process. They took it from
start to finish. And they participated in the
construction process and watching things as we
went. So that was a good process. Those folks were
probably the most critical. The other things that
we did once, well, then we hired a consultant, Bill
Manning from University of California,
Berkeley. And he and Moffitt and I went through the
program statement and did all the editing and did
all that stuff. Plus, he participated in all the
program design reviews along the way. So Bill
Manning was really critical to, I say Moffitt,
myself, Bill, and then the staff people that I
mentioned. As you were dreaming about what this
was going to be, what other institutions were the
end of the rainbow and what you were hoping to
approximate or hoping to copy, equal, surpass?
surpass was probably the word we were looking for
because we had a pretty good opportunity with the
amount of money that we had available but we looked
at and for different reasons different things
arizona and arizona state probably two of the
newer ones and a particular architect did those
and several others so that most of his were very
similar We looked at Tulane and a different set of
architects in a little bit different field,
probably more closely resembling this one than
anything else that's out there. Texas Tech,
because theirs was probably the first building
type like this that had the real open effect, and
you notice this building is quite open. We
actually visited Missouri, because they did some
nice things with their addition, and the old
building.
Those are probably the major ones. As the students
let you know what they were hoping for, were there
any surprises? No, not really. I mean,
we were pretty well in tandem with what The surveys
that we got from them and what we were thinking
about were pretty darn close. In terms of what you
were hoping to achieve with the new building
compared to what we already had, in which areas
would we make the greatest improvement? Swimming
facilities?
Weak fitness rooms, swimming.
I think the biggest improvement overall is is when
you walk in the door, the presentation of sports
facilities in this kind of a venue are so much
different than they are in the traditional
venues. You go over to the Reed Building, and it's
not exciting to walk in there. You walk in here, we
just had a tour of all of my colleges. There was
about 90 of them that came down here for the tour.
Our nurse had a facility, supposing, in Austin,
and 90 of them came down here to see this place. And
almost to a person, when they walked in the front
door, their jaw went, wow. And that's one of the
ways that we can get people interested in an
active, healthy lifestyle, is to do it right. I
mean, the wow factor is what we're looking for.
That's what Moffitt said. When Moffitt told the
architects, we want an exciting, exuberant
building that attracts people, We'd get them in
the front door. We'd show them all this stuff. They
can't help but be excited and want to participate.
And the site had already been selected. No.
Describe how that came about. Let's go back. After
we did the painting on the program, then we brought
the architects on. They did a design charrette. It
was like a two- or three-day charrette. The first
day we spent just trying to put spaces next to each
other that made sense. The second and third day was
with all of our stakeholders, students, physical
education staff, coaches, you know, whoever
might have, and a lot of other people in the
university. And we met out at Red Cashin's ranch,
the little building he had there, the little
house. And they went through discussions. I mean,
there was 50 people there at times. And that night,
we also had a meeting on campus. And there was
probably 100 people that showed up that day, just
gathering input that the architects could hear
for themselves. And that thing went on all day.
There was probably 50 or 60 people that went
through that. They'd come and go as they had to
leave to go to class and do other things. But they,
at the end of the day, presented like three
or four different concepts. And we all sat there
and said, no, you missed the point. Oh, what have we
been saying, you know? And we were all so
disappointed. I mean, it had been such a
productive day, and they did this, and we all sat
there and said, oh, no, they just missed the point.
Well, what happened was we went home and they
worked all night. They presented three concepts
the next morning and we would have taken any of
them. They were really good. And we focused in on
this concept and then spent the rest of the day
doing a little refining of some of the ideas we
talked about. What were the most difficult parts
to accommodate in the structure?
Trying to get the spatial relationships right
because you have wet areas. You have an outdoor wet
area and an indoor wet area and it's got to relate to
the locker room. The locker room needs to relate to
the desk and you don't want it in a wet area. So that
whole thing is more of an art than people would
suggest and that's why one of the Each team of Texas
architects had to have a nationally known firm who
had built a facility this time before or worked on
one. We had HOK out of Kansas City. I think that was
really key to have some experience in it. We feel we
had some experience, but it's nice to have
somebody else there. And that's why we were pretty
liberal in bringing in consultants, because this
is a once in a lifetime building, and you need to do
it right, because if you don't do it right, you can
end up with a headache in a lot of different ways,
especially when you're going to pools and
gymnasiums and stuff like that. It can really turn
into a
headache. There was a line there. I set it down, and
now I forget where I was going with it. All right,
other other difficult. You're the sewing area.
Now, actually, I thought our architects pulled
together pretty good. I mean, we spent probably
six hours in this trend arranging spaces, what
they call bubble diagrams. And after that was
done, that's pretty Trying to make sure the track
was, because we were going for a big track, and I
think we got the biggest one in the world. It was
almost a quarter mile, and that ended up working
out pretty well. The arrangement of the
racquetball course, we must have drawn up 15
different arrangements, shipped it off to them,
or worked with them at meetings. That was pretty
difficult. Trying to get it just right. Did you
have any preconceived ideas that got changed?
Every one of them. Oh, okay. Every preconceived
idea got changed. That was fun working with these
guys. They were really creative, and their ideas
were better than mine. That doesn't happen very
often. They really were good. They were fun to work
with. How did this location come about? That was a
very political kind of a football, and what the
board did was the right thing, is they said, okay,
you guys give us a recommendation, the
architects. And they went through a rating
process that worked out pretty well. And although
this was not my favorite site because we had
intramural fields here, it probably was the best
site for this particular building. My favorite
site was Duncan Drillfield. In reality, this
building was too big for that site. We couldn't
have had any associated parking with it. You could
build the building, but no parking. It really
dominated that space up there, too. One thing they
liked about putting the building here, it's a big
building, but it doesn't look so big next to Kyle
Field and Olsen Field and that Reed building. If
you look over here, if you take any of these
buildings, and you put them over on that other
corner of campus, they're not going to fit very
well. They all fit pretty well. So that was one of
the considerations, too. Did any board members
get involved? Actually, we did several
presentations to the board and, I mean, they were
always, you know, from day one they were
supportive of it. We did, on these trips that we
took, Moffitt and I took videotape and we put
together what ended up to be about a six and a half
minute presentation that we showed to the board.
Because most people didn't understand You know,
you walk into most facilities, they don't look
like this. They look more like what was over there.
And so we wanted to get the point across of what a
recreation center was going to look like. And the
video really helped quite a bit to get the point
across to them. They were all supportive, very
supportive of it. Did any outsider, meaning
someone outside the normal area that should have
been planting this, did any outsider attempt to
affect it? Romero Galindo. Who? Romero Galindo.
He owned Arrowfit at the time. He didn't want it at
all. He was making, and in the long run, the guy that
owned the
school gym, all the local club owners didn't lose a
lot. At that time, we had nothing for women's
fitness room equipment, so to speak.
I'd say of the
kids on this campus that worked out on
cardiovascular or in the weight room, probably
70% of them worked out off campus, 30% on campus.
Now it's probably 80% on campus and 20% off.
Probably more than 80% of people who use that room.
That was a big hit for them. If you were doing it
again now, is there anything you'd do differently
based on your experience? In reality, that's one
of the questions all of my colleagues ask, what
would you do differently? And I think our planning
processes and the architects we worked with, it
was open enough and we asked enough questions as we
went. There's one thing we missed probably, two
things. Our outdoor pool area's a little small and
we knew that at that point in time we weren't
willing to give up parking at the time. Our outdoor
recreation area, or customer service areas
should have been right here. At that time, we let
the overhead door and its ugliness dominate our
thought. Instead of putting it here, we put it
there so it's at the back of the building so we don't
care what it looks like. We could have figured that
out, we just weren't smart enough at the time, but
other than that, Most people when they build these
things don't build them big enough and we really
hit the mark pretty close. There's times when
we're overcrowded but most of the time it's we
probably hit it closer than anybody did. So
construction started when? March of 92. And it's
open? Actually March of 93 because we opened in
August of 95. And what was the reaction
nationally? within among the knowledgeable
people to this facility. Well, it's interesting
because there's a little bit of jealousy about
that and
Georgia opened a facility that they say is 400,000
square feet. What's this one? reality is georgia
has a lot of physical education and laboratory
space and varsity space in there and our building
for recreation is bigger than theirs there's
again on this tour this weekend they said yours is
so much bigger than georgia's so they have a big
building yours is bigger and that's the realities
i've looked i haven't seen a layout of there but
i've seen the listing of the recreation spaces and
we have more is is this one looked upon nationally
with It's the best. It really is. And what
happened, what I was starting to say, there was a
young graduate assistant at Maryland, I think,
that did an email survey, which facility is the
best, which program is the best, and we came out
number one in both. Oh, really? This is amongst our
colleagues. And then after she published that,
then she got ridiculed for it. Now wait a minute. We
didn't have the opportunity. Well, everybody had
the opportunity because it was on a listserv. If
you're on a listserv, you had the opportunity to
respond. Who would be some of the other close
runners up? Texas is probably number two. Ohio
State is going to be real good. We spent $36 million
on this. They're going to spend $135 million on
this. Wow. And they're a school about our size.
They're in, you know, 40,000. Just a little bit
bigger, not much. Yeah. But Texas, they built the
rec center, and then they remodeled Gregory. And
between the two, they're pretty nice. They're
still in second place. So Gregory is part of their
intramural facilities now? Right. And the
interesting thing about Gregory is they did the
rec center, and it's pretty plain Jane. Then we did
this building, and then they did Gregory. And if
you go out and look at Gregory, you'll see a lot of
things that we did here that they tried to copy in
Gregory. Even though it was remodeled, they tried
to do it. And they did a darn good job of it, I think.
The other facilities that have been built
recently are probably, except for Georgia, are so
small that it doesn't, Arizona and Arizona State
still have nice buildings.
Trying to think who, Ohio State's gonna be the next
one. Have there, in intramurals, and
particularly with this facility, have y'all ever
had any celebrity visitors who have used any of the
facilities? George Bush. And he's been here
several times. What did he? He uses the Wake
Fitness Room and walks on the track. first time he
came didn't get anything done because students
had to talk to him more recently they allowed him to
get his work out in what kind of arrangements have
to be made by y'all we we get we worked out
membership for he and his wife and i think 10 secret
service I think when they came over there was more
like four people at a time. Ten Secret Service
members had memberships. What kind of time notice
do y'all get? None? No, they just drop in. They just
drop in? Have there been any students that almost
dropped their teeth? Well, you know, the first
time it came, everybody wanted to chat with him and
they did and he was very gracious. But what they
tell me from downstairs is that most of the time
when he's come the last two or three times, people
have been very cordial and they say hello and you
know they're happy, they're really happy he's
here but they understand he's here to work out too.
And he's always been very, very cordial out there.
Always, always. We had some
WWF is over here, the wrestling. We had about three
or four of their people come over and left one
afternoon. Oh, really? Yeah. Okay. See, Ray
Childress has been here, I believe. A few sports
celebrities. Any entertainers that came over to
work out before their performance or anything?
Not that I'm aware of. I would guess that Clay
Walker's probably been here, but I don't, you
know, we didn't know about him at the time. He's
around here so much. Any regents and or
legislators?
Well, we gave Fred Brown a tour here not too long
ago. Don Powell and... He's in a group of people in
Houston, I forget the name of the group, but this
was on their tour one day when they came up here.
They visited here, the Core Center and the Bush
Library. He was in my tour group, so we're giving
him a good tour. All right, looking back over these
27 years, one of the key decisions was obviously
this structure. What were some other, now as you
recall, what were some other key decisions y'all
made regarding intramurals?
Well, I think the first thing was to try to create
sports opportunities for everybody. revising
the rules so it wasn't quite as physical out there
and it was more fun by involving women, I think was a
key point.
I've continued to focus on quality training,
quality sports equipment, just to quality
experience for all our students that was one of the
commitments i made when i first came here whatever
the best sports equipment is kids are going to have
that to play with
and now we're trying to do the same thing with
facilities too i think building building the
glided outdoor field space was critical to the
intramural program it still is And it's now a
pretty cool sports club program. We're
continuing to expand out there with play fields.
Things changed so much when this building came
online. Because we went from below the radar scope
to being premier. This building is used almost
every Almost every donor that's on campus gets a
tour of this building. Many, if not all faculty,
who are being recruited get a tour of this
building. And I didn't realize how much that was
until Evelyn started giving me the numbers we had.
I asked her, how many have kept through here? The
next morning she called, well, we had two this
morning. And this was at a time when we expected
that many people to be on campus.
Students, I go to mothers club meetings, I say how
many of you have been to the rec center? 90 to 95%. I
go to fish camp, freshman, how many of you have been
to the rec center? 90 to 95%. I go to A&M meetings,
A&M club meetings, how many of you have been to the
rec center? Our students, we give tours all the
time, we did. 300 tours in the first eight months we
were open organized tours to 22 000 people it's got
a bigger sense but not only do we give tours but our
students give tours to their parents to their
brothers and sisters to the friends from high
school or whatever and there's tours going on here
all the time game day is really wild oh i hadn't
thought about that all kinds of people down there
we had We'll have 1,500 to 2,000 people
participating. We'll have more than that of
people touring the building on game day. The place
is full. Now, when is the building not open?
We close on Thanksgiving and the Friday after
Thanksgiving. We close on Christmas Eve and
Christmas Day, New Year's Eve and New Year's Day.
we used to close on five days a year now it's now
maybe seven or eight all right and is it open seven
24 hours a day no we are open at six except on and
close at midnight except on saturday we open at
eight and sunday we open at uh ten and then in the
summertime there are a little bit less than that
but but that's our general So, but it is open seven
days a week, at least. Our philosophy is that
recreation facilities need to be open when
everybody else is playing. And that's why we've
been there for a while. We were only closed two days
a year. My staff has said this. so hard to get people
to work, and some of them we've extended that a
little bit. If you were being challenged by a
self-appointed critic, say at a legislature or
something or other, what argument would you give,
what justification would you give for
intramurals and its facilities?
First of all, it's a program that's desired by the
student body.
Secondly, it's a program that fits in well with
college atmosphere. We've done a study, a grade
point study, every semester we've been open.
We've taken our users, our student users, and
split them into quartiles and compared their
grade point average. And every semester,
undergraduates The students who use the rec
center must have the highest grade point ever. The
only thing that tells you is people who are active
are gonna be successful. So we are not in the way of
creating a quality education. In fact, we are
probably one of the best attractors for quality
people. You put up a facility like this, people who
really are active say, yeah, I wanna go there, look
at that place. And this is how Ohio State got so much
money for theirs. They were losing ground to, they
went from second to fifth choice among Ohio
seniors on where to go. And everybody that they'd
lost ground to had built a new rec center. So they
used that as part of the case. But the reality is,
the people that they wanted to get, they weren't
getting. They were getting, the students that
they were still getting in Ohio State were their
second and third tier students, not the first
tier. Well, it would also be correct to argue that
this, in effect, is an investment that the
students, if they didn't have this facility,
might use their energy and activities in things
far less positive. Exactly. There's little on
this campus that is more positive in the use of
leisure time. And students are going to have
leisure time. They are. And there's nothing that
can be more positive than this. There's a lot of
things that are more negative. The other part of
this is essentially the students are funding this
themselves. It's not like we're asking for money
from... the general tax base. This is coming from
students and their parents. So that today it's
50th semester? And what would that $50 buy if they
went out to a private recreational facility?
Month and a half. The last four months here. Let's
see, as another example of a positive, Give two or
three examples of the worst problems you've ever
had to work out of intramurals.
There must have been a scuffle or two at some
football game or something or other. Well, the
worst one was the worst one that I actually was
involved in was up in Texas. No, no, but here. Well,
let me tell you a story. We have some scuffles. You
know, we probably, in the 27 years I've been here,